RFC: Base 3000 & Notebooks launch plan (#144)
PostHog/meta: requests-for-comments/2023-10-27-base3000-launch.md

# Base 3000 & Notebooks launch

> We want to launch the ‘first version’ of PostHog 3000 after the next sprint, which means the week starting November 13th (+ 1 week if needed). We have decided to **include Notebooks** in this launch, so that we can have a big launch that combines functionality and design changes.

Reviewer: Can we get some detail on what the launch will functionally look like to users? 

I'm not clear if PostHog 3000 will be a opt-in beta for them, something they can toggle on/off, controlled with early access management, or if we're just going to switch users to a new UI without warning? 

I'd actually really appreciate a demo of how this will work ahead of launch, and I suspect @andyvan-ph @Lior539 and @ivanagas may want eyes on it too.

Author: 1) PostHog 3000 should be rolled out to everyone, not as a feature preview, in my opinion. Otherwise it will be hard to time launch announcement and actual launch
2) Having something prominent in the UI that announces the change, maybe with a link to the blog post is something we could do
3) Giving people the option to revert to the old design -> Maybe, but this first PostHog 3000 version is free from big controversial changes, so I think we should just change it and people will get used to it
4) A demo of the 'launch version', highlighting what has changed is a good idea. @benjackwhite @Twixes is this something one of you could do in one of the next All Hands?

Reviewer 2: 10000% for making this a feature preview, no question - at least for a sprint or two (but ideally much longer). While we've made a bunch of structural changes, this rollout doesn't demonstrate enough value to justify changing the entire UI. We have a ton of other changes that won't be rolled out yet:

- New query builder
- Deep dives (whether it's a sidebar or tabs, the ability to look into data without being committed and having to use the back button)
- Panes
- Tabs

On top of that, the left pane is entirely unusable (my fault). We have a lot of massaging to do with it to really make it feel more useful than the current index views. As of now, I personally feel lost and like it's harder to use. So until we at least get to a point where ** _I_ ** feel comfortable, I do not think we should be forcing this update on anyone.

This is another example of something we're prone to shipping [entirely too early](https://github.com/PostHog/company-internal/issues/1183) and it can only damage us forcing it on everyone early vs taking a little more time for refinement.

I understand that it's hard to maintain the current UI and 3000 forever, but it's definitely worth putting off a full launch until we can solve some of the basic UX issues and also put together a good story about what our long-term vision is, so that people can buy into it.

Reviewer 3: Just chiming in to add a strong +1 Cory's POV. Purely based on what I can see right now, PostHog 3000 doesn't feel ready for release outside of Feature Preview. 

I'd like to:

1. Have more time to dogfood it and provide feedback internally (I wasn't aware it had substantively changed until recently and haven't used it much personally).

2. Actively recruit some friendly users to get their take on it.

This feels way bigger than launching Surveys, for example, and the potential for a backlash is **huge**.

Reviewer 4: (Please don't base this on how the current flag feels like. We are actively working this sprint on getting the things we think are releasable into a releasable, stable state 😅 - all the more subjective things are purposefully being moved to follow up releases, after much more intense iteration and internal testing).

Reviewer 3: Cool, that's fine, but I'd still like to tread with a tiny bit more caution + have more time to use it in its "ready" state. The UI is something literally every user interacts with, so it requires a bit more belt and braces than a typical beta launch.

Author: We are likely going to stretch the timeline a bit @andyvan-ph to have enough time for your points: Familiarise the team with the changes, look out for things that don't work, and potentially run some usability tests with external people.

I'll update this RFC on Friday, once we had the chance to meet as a team and agree on a plan forward.

Reviewer 3: Sounds good, thanks. 😊

> We want to launch the ‘first version’ of PostHog 3000 after the next sprint, which means the week starting November 13th (+ 1 week if needed). We have decided to **include Notebooks** in this launch, so that we can have a big launch that combines functionality and design changes.

Reviewer: What's the rationale for doing both at once? 

From a marketing POV it won't make too much position, but may be slightly clearer to tell users about these things one at a time, rather than together. And I assume from an engineering POV it's going to be easier and more stable to go one step at a time?

Author: Notebooks is ready to go and Base 3000 is ready to go in 2 weeks, and since the same team is responsible for it, we just picked the same date, rather than artificially delaying one or announcing two things separately.

If we would launch Notebooks a week or two before PostHog 3000, it would mean all screenshots and demos we produce will be outdated 2 weeks later. If we launch PostHog 3000 first, it means another delay for Notebooks and that feature just needs to go out now, at least in Beta 😅

I think the risk is low from an engineering perspective, Notebooks has been used internally for a while and I don't expect 1,000s of users using it in the first couple of days (though that would be great). The first version of PostHog3000 is a very light change, it is mostly dark mode and a different search, even the navigation will stay similar to what we have now, so I also don't expect a lot of instability here.

Unless you think it makes more sense from a Marketing perspective to announce the 2 things separately, so they both get the hype they deserve, then I could see the following order:

1) Notebooks Beta (light marketing)
2) PostHog 3000 launch
3) Notebooks launch

Reviewer 4: This is my main reasoning for launching them together. Notebooks behave quite differently in 3000 world, especially considering the "side panel". I think it will feel broken to release it and then 2 weeks later pull the rug and completely change the experience. 

We're essentially bundling it together so that we minimise the number of dramatic changes in a row, whilst actually having something powerful to offer in our first 3000 release, rather than just a skin.

Reviewer 5: Related to this, it's probably worth sharing that when I've demoed and accidentally had (admittedly, much older) versions of 3000 up, I got some quick questions confirming that "I'll be able to switch back to the old interface") so am assuming based on that that we should expect existing users to initially reject 3000, just by virtue of the fact that it's a 'new' interface and therefore requires new mental models to use. So I would hope that notebooks are just as functional in posthog 1.basic as in 3000. and that they have enough to offer to this set (or not, and we just use notebooks as a carrot)

Author: We've agreed with @joethreepwood we would launch the two things together, so I will resolve this conversation for readability.

## Scope for launch

- Dark Mode
- Base 3000 [Check this mega issue for details](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/18089)
    
<img width="674" alt="Screenshot 2023-10-27 at 10 38 50" src="https://github.com/PostHog/meta/assets/14750837/abb9e559-91ea-408b-a8fd-5105f3c4c626">

## Out of scope for launch (amongst other things)

- Sidebar (Index view)
- Canvas-powered dashboards
- Query builder
- [Check this mega issue for details + the full list](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/18089)

## Rollout plan

- [x]  Now: Roll out [Notebooks](https://app.posthog.com/feature_flags/8734) to PostHog Team

> - [ ]  Now: Roll out [PostHog 3000 (Base 3000 scope)](https://app.posthog.com/feature_flags/8472) to PostHog Team

Reviewer 6: We should specifically ask for feedback after this and people should click through their respective product areas and point out issues to us, so we can help fixing.

Author: Yes, 100%. If this timeline looks good, we can share it in All Hands on Monday asking for this, and again a week later, when we have made some more progress on known issues.

> - [ ]  October 30th: Roll out Notebooks Beta to 100% of users, to get some early feedback

Reviewer 6: Is the 100% here a typo? Since we have roll out notebooks to 100% of users further down again. Otherwise I might not understand how notebooks beta and notebooks differ from each other.

Reviewer: I too assume this is a typo. If it's less than 100%, I'd like to know how we're targeting these users.

Author: Ah good spot. I first had listed roll out to 100% for the 'big' launch, and then I read @joethreepwood's Notebooks launch RFC where he proposed a beta launch of notebooks first, so I incorporated this, because I think it's a good idea. 
Notebooks is (almost) ready and we can expose it in the UI (with a beta tag), getting some people to use it, and then announce it a couple of weeks later, I don't think there is a conflict here.

Author: Note: I don't think we are beta-ready by Monday, more likely middle of next week

> - [ ]  October 30th: [Notebooks Beta Marketing Activities](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/139)

Reviewer: We'll need to update this to roll in 3000, obvs.

## Rollout plan
- [ ] Base 3000 ready to release (10th Nov)
- [ ] Internal and a/b testing starts (13th Nov)
- [ ] Docs revamp and updates ready (24th Nov)
- [ ] Product pages for 3000 / Notebooks (24th Nov)
- [ ] Release [PostHog 3000 (Base 3000 scope)](https://app.posthog.com/feature_flags/8472) (27th Nov)
- [ ] Release [Notebooks](https://app.posthog.com/feature_flags/8734) (4th Dec) (or together with Base 3000 if we feel docs are easier)

## Pre-launch evaluation

We decided that even the "base" version has enough major changes that we want to test that it both doesn't impact our key metrics negatively as well as (if possible) evaluate if it is overall an improvement, especially with new users.
This might be hard to do or to get clear signals for whether it is an improvement (especially as it is only a step along the way to the end goal UI/UX).

- [ ] **Signup/onboarding Experiment**: _just_ for the onboarding we could experiment with the styles separate from the rest of the app
  - [ ] **Metrics**: Same as usual onboarding metrics?
  - [ ] Important that we keep the style consistent from signup through to app usage as otherwise it will be a janky experience

>   - [ ] We mostly care about **negatively** impacting the flow

Reviewer 7: Chatted with Ben this morning, mostly relating to this part of the launch. Summary of what we discussed:

1. Signup should be considered and tested separately from onboarding
2. Signup/login tests can wait until later, those screens needs to feel _super_ cohesive with the rest of the app
4. The new product-specific onboarding (scenes /products and /onboarding) will be rolled out to everyone soon, so we can ignore /ingestion
5. The new onboarding will be trivial to 3000-ize, so we should just do that and test it with the rest of the app experience so that flow (onboarding -> full app) feels cohesive
    - I feel like cohesiveness here is more important than signup -> onboarding
6. All signup / onboarding / logged out scenes will only be light mode to reduce work required here
7. We should wait until we have button styles mostly locked in so we only have to test once 
    - This is up for debate depending on how long until button styles are ready to go. If it will be a significant delay we can move forward without, for the onboarding at least

How this impacts experimentation:
- If we are testing logged-in-states separately from logged-out-states, we don't need to worry about persistence. 
- If we want we can test with new users only (org created after x date will capture most of these, though some people do have multiple orgs) 
- We want to make sure new people get a consistent experience from the moment they log in, even if we decide to make changes to 3000. 
  - We can either add a user/org property once someone logs in, or manually add that person (and everyone in their org?) to the feature preview
  - If a user/org was originally on 3000, they should always be left on 3000, even if we end the experiment. Consistency is more important at this stage, they will get improvements as we make them to 3000.

- [ ] **General Experiment**: in combination with internal testing we could start to roll out the product to new and existing users as an experiment
  - [ ] Important that we keep the style consistent from signup through to app usage as otherwise it will be a janky experience

>   - [ ] We originally opted against being able to go back to the old UI - do we want to offer this?

Author: Potentially for the period where we are running the A/B tests *before* the official launch, we can have a banner in the app *this is a design preview, you can revert to the old UI here*, so it's not such a novel experience without context, and people are less confused as to why the docs screenshots look different / they can help themselves

Reviewer 7: I'm somewhat iffy on letting people opt out from an experimental perspective. I think it has the potential to muddy results. If someone is the kind of person who just hates abrupt change (most humans tbh!) they will opt out. But that doesn't mean it's a bad design. If they were forced to stick with it we actually get to see if they are able to get their work done even with the new design.

Similarly, people who like the change are more likely to be the early-adopter type and more likely to just explore around until they figure out how to do what they need to do. So we're getting too-positive signals from these people and too-negative signals from the former. 

I _think_ that if we can get confident about new users using A/B tests, we'll have more confidence about existing users. When we do A/B test existing users (if we want to, which is prob a good idea because they are more likely to be heavy users) we could maybe keep it in the feature preview and if they email support tell them how to disable?

  - [ ] **Metrics**:
    - [ ] Same as onboarding?

>     - [ ] Retention over time (what time frame do we need to be clear on this?)

Reviewer 7: I think retention is going to be tough as it's usually best looked at on a multi-month basis and I don't think anyone wants this to drag on that long.

    - [ ] Number of clicks on the sidebar as a negative metric?

>     - [ ] Number of searches now vs before?

Reviewer 7: Want to be careful here, people could love the new design and it makes them want to explore. Or maybe search is more apparent / better and people use it more.

Reviewer 6: Yeah, this is mainly in since we're moving search from the top bar into a CMD+K omnibar and want to be sure people find it.

Reviewer 7: Ohhhh I see. How will people know how to use the CMD+K shortkey? I never use it (and rarely use search on posthog in general tbh...)

Reviewer 6: We'll add a button to open it (likely in the navigation or search menu). You're in good company then, only [5% of our users](https://app.posthog.com/dashboard/110036) use the search at the moment.

>     - [ ] Choice to use dark mode?

Reviewer 8: I'd add something around number of discoveries, number of feature flags created etc

Author: The growth team has a bunch of PostHog dashboards:
- Activation: https://app.posthog.com/dashboard/60728
- Acquisition: https://app.posthog.com/dashboard/56927
- Revenue: https://app.posthog.com/dashboard/56168

We could reuse these and break the insights down by the feature flag true / false, to see differences between the two variants.

Reviewer 2: My only request: we just need to allow for a bit of burn-in time on any metrics we're evaluating.

We definitely shouldn't be too reactionary to a 5% decline in any given metric in the first week. By default, people hate change, so our first instinct shouldn't just be to revert at the first complaint. It can also take some time for people to get their bearings.

Best analogy I can give: When a car company redesigns a model, the reactions can be polarizing; some people love, a lot of people hate. But does it really affect the adoption of that vehicle in the future? Not necessarily. And over time, people get used to it and move on to complain about the next shiny thing.

PostHog 2999 (as I like to call it – but also known as Base 3000) is a positive change in every regard, but it can take some users time to adjust, even with no substantial differences.

This is less tangible than a minor change in a metric, but if we do have differences in the numbers, I'm hoping we can work to find _better_ solutions to those specific problems than just reverting as a gut reaction.

Reviewer 7: Definitely. I think the way we approach new users is different for how we approach existing users. I think most NEW users won't give us any time to adjust to a new interface. If they hate it (read: they can't do what they want because it's confusing, etc) then they will just leave. At the same time they're less likely to be reactionary based on the prior interface because they've never seen it. I think if we can get to a point where we feel confident about 3000 with new users, existing users will eventually come around.

> - [ ] **Qualatitive testing**
>   - [ ] Survey for opted in users witht the new UI to ask what they think about it?

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [ ] **Qualitative testing**
  - [ ] Survey for opted in users with the new UI to ask what they think about it?
```

>   - [ ] In person feedback

Author: I am on vacation the second half of November, so I will unlikely be able to lead in-person interviews/usability tests, but I can reach out to users I have interviewed in the past I know would be more than happy to give feedback on the new UI, and can set up the calls for when I am away, so that you can conduct them.

Author: We can also invite those users we interviewed / surveyed to a temporary shared Slack channel, where they can continue to share feedback or design bugs, if they see them. This might also be a good opportunity to find *any* design/UI bugs we have and are not aware of, and by running this as a temporary project users might be more inclined to share feedback as well

### How a decision will be made

**Negative key metrics** 
- Investigate why and follow up 

**Same or positive key metrics** 
- Still investigate why (we don't want to be overly confident based on metrics alone) but move forward with rollout

**User feedback**
- Differentiate between taste and functionality.
  - If people are actively havign a hard time to work with the UI / find what they want (especially new users) this is the kind of thing we should act on

## To Dos for launch

- [ ]  Finish [sprint goals](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/18174#issuecomment-1779475963): Ben, David, Michael, Thomas
- [ ]  [Notebooks Beta](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/139) Marketing: Joe to lead (separate issue)
- [ ]  [Notebooks](https://github.com/PostHog/meta/issues/139) & Base 3000 Marketing: Joe to lead (separate issue)

> - [ ]  Test Base 3000 and Notebooks and report any bugs in the [#posthog3000](https://posthog.slack.com/archives/C04L2CV12V9) or [#notebooks-feedback](https://posthog.slack.com/archives/C05N9R3HT7V) Slack channesl: Everyone

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- [ ]  Test Base 3000 and Notebooks and report any bugs in the [#posthog3000](https://posthog.slack.com/archives/C04L2CV12V9) or [#notebooks-feedback](https://posthog.slack.com/archives/C05N9R3HT7V) Slack channels: Everyone
- [ ] Make sure signup/login aren't impacted by 3000 styles (until we are ready to test them)
- [ ] Get new onboarding rolled out to everyone and 3000-ize it @raquelmsmith 
```
